Activities and Participation 
ACTIVITIES AND 
PARTICIPATION 
ICF 
 
Definitions: 
Activity is the execution of a task or action by an individual.  
 Participation is involvement in a life situation.  
 Activity limitations are difficulties an individual may have in 
executing activities. 
Participation restrictions are problems an individual may 
experience in involvement in life situations.  
Qualifiers 
The domains for the Activities and Participation component are given in a single 
list that covers the full range of life areas (from basic learning and watching to 
composite areas such as social tasks).  This component can be used to denote 
activities (a) or participation (p) or both.  
The two qualifiers for the Activities and Participation component are the 
performance qualifier and the capacity qualifier. The performance qualifier 
describes what an individual does in his or her current environment. Because the 
current environment brings in a societal context, performance as recorded by 
this qualifier can also be understood  as "involvement in a life situation" or "the 
lived experience" of people in the actual context in which they live. This context 
includes the environmental factors – all aspects of the physical, social and 
attitudinal world, which can be coded using the Environmental Factors 
component.  
The capacity qualifier describes an individual’s ability to execute a task or an 
action. This qualifier identifies the highest probable level of functioning that a 
person may reach in a given domain at a given moment. Capacity is measured in 
a uniform or standard environment, and thus reflects the environmentally 
adjusted ability of the individual. The Environmental Factors component can be 
used to describe the features of this uniform or standard environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
127 
Activities and Participation 
 
Both capacity and performance qualifiers can be used both with and without 
assistive devices or personal assistance, and in accordance with the following 
scale: 
 
xxx.0  NO difficulty 
xxx.1  MILD difficulty  
xxx.2  MODERATE difficulty 
xxx.3  SEVERE difficulty  
xxx.4 COMPLETE difficulty 
xxx.8  not specified 
xxx.9  not applicable 
(none, absent, negligible,… ) 
(slight, low,…) 
(medium, fair,...) 
(high, extreme, …) 
(total,…) 
 
ICF 
0-4 % 
5-24 % 
25-49 % 
50-95 % 
96-100 % 
 
Broad ranges of percentages are provided for those cases in which calibrated 
assessment instruments or other standards are available to quantify the 
performance problem or capacity limitation.  For example, when no 
performance problem or a complete performance problem is coded, this scaling 
has a margin of error of up to 5%. A moderate performance problem is defined 
as up to half of the scale of a total performance problem. The percentages are to 
be calibrated in different domains with reference to population standards as 
percentiles. For this quantification to be used in a uniform manner, assessment 
procedures need to be developed through  research. 
For a further explanation of coding convention in ICF, refer to Annex 2.  
 
 
 
128 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
Chapter 1   
Learning and applying knowledge 
This chapter is about learning, applying the knowledge that is learned, thinking, 
solving problems, and  making decisions. 
 
Purposeful sensory experiences (d110-d129) 
 
 d 110   Watching 
Using the sense of seeing intentionally to experience visual stimuli, 
such as watching a sporting event or children playing. 
 
 d 115   Listening 
Using the sense of hearing intentionally to experience auditory stimuli, 
such as listening to a radio, music or a lecture. 
 
 d 120   Other purposeful sensing 
Using the body’s other basic senses intentionally to experience stimuli, 
such as touching and feeling textures, tasting sweets or smelling 
flowers. 
 
 d 129   Purposeful sensory experiences, other specified and unspecified 
 
Basic learning (d130-d159) 
 
 d 130   Copying 
Imitating or mimicking as a basic component of learning, such as 
copying a gesture, a sound or the letters of an alphabet. 
 
 d 135   Rehearsing 
Repeating a sequence of events or symbols as a basic component of 
learning, such as counting by tens or practising the recitation of a 
poem. 
 
 d 140   Learning to read 
Developing the competence to read written material (including Braille) 
with fluency and accuracy, such as recognizing characters and 
alphabets, sounding out words with correct pronunciation, and 
understanding words and phrases. 
 
 
129 
Activities and Participation 
 
 d 145   Learning to write 
ICF 
Developing the competence to produce symbols that represent sounds, 
words or phrases in order to convey meaning (including Braille 
writing), such as spelling effectively and using correct grammar. 
 
 d 150   Learning to calculate 
Developing the competence to manipulate numbers and perform simple 
and complex mathematical operations, such as using mathematical 
signs for addition and subtraction and applying the correct 
mathematical operation to a problem. 
 
 d 155   Acquiring skills 
Developing basic and complex competencies in integrated sets of 
actions or tasks so as to initiate and follow through with the acquisition 
of a skill, such as manipulating tools or playing games like chess. 
Inclusions:  acquiring basic and complex skills 
d 1550  Acquiring basic skills  
Learning elementary, purposeful actions, such as learning to 
manipulate eating utensils, a pencil or a simple tool. 
d 1551  Acquiring complex skills  
Learning integrated sets of actions so as to follow rules, and to 
sequence and coordinate one's movements, such as learning to 
play games like football or to use a building tool. 
d 1558  Acquiring skills, other specified  
d 1559  Acquiring skills, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 d 159   Basic learning, other specified and unspecified 
 
Applying knowledge  (d160-d179) 
 
 d 160   Focusing attention 
Intentionally focusing on specific stimuli, such as by filtering out 
distracting noises. 
 
 
130 
ICF 
 d 163   Thinking 
Activities and Participation 
Formulating and manipulating ideas, concepts, and images, whether 
goal-oriented or not, either alone or with others, such as creating 
fiction, proving a theorem, playing with ideas, brainstorming, 
meditating, pondering, speculating, or reflecting. 
Exclusions: solving problems (d175);  making decisions (d177) 
 
 d 166   Reading 
Performing activities involved in the comprehension and interpretation 
of written language (e.g. books, instructions or newspapers in text or 
Braille), for the purpose of obtaining general knowledge or specific 
information. 
Exclusion:  learning to read (d140) 
 
 d 170   Writing 
Using or producing symbols or language to convey information, such 
as producing a written record of events or ideas or drafting a letter. 
Exclusion:  learning to write (d145) 
 
 d 172   Calculating 
Performing computations by applying mathematical principles to solve 
problems that are described in words and producing or displaying the 
results, such as computing the sum of three numbers or finding the 
result of dividing one number by another. 
Exclusion:  learning to calculate (d150) 
 
 d 175   Solving problems 
Finding solutions to questions or situations by identifying and 
analysing issues, developing options and solutions, evaluating potential 
effects of solutions, and executing a chosen solution, such as in 
resolving a dispute between two people. 
Inclusions: solving simple and complex problems 
Exclusions:  thinking (d163); making decisions (d177) 
d 1750  Solving simple problems  
Finding solutions to a simple problem involving a single issue 
or question, by identifying and analysing the issue, developing 
solutions, evaluating the potential effects of the solutions and 
executing a chosen solution. 
131 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
d 1751  Solving complex problems  
ICF 
Finding solutions to a complex problem involving multiple 
and interrelated  issues, or several related problems, by 
identifying and analysing the issue, developing solutions, 
evaluating the potential effects of the solutions and executing 
a chosen solution. 
 
 
 
d 1758  Solving problems, other specified  
d 1759  Solving problems, unspecified  
 d 177   Making decisions 
Making a choice among options, implementing the choice, and 
evaluating the effects of the choice, such as selecting and purchasing a 
specific item, or deciding to undertake and undertaking one task from 
among several tasks that need to be done. 
Exclusions:  thinking (d163); solving problems (d175) 
 
 d 179   Applying knowledge, other specified and unspecified 
 
 d 198   Learning and applying knowledge, other specified 
 
 d 199   Learning and applying knowledge, unspecified 
 
 
132 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
Chapter 2   
General tasks and demands 
This chapter is about general aspects of carrying out single or multiple tasks, 
organizing routines and handling stress. These items can be used in conjunction 
with more specific tasks or actions to identify the underlying features of the 
execution of tasks under different circumstances. 
 
 d 210   Undertaking a single task 
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions related to the 
mental and physical components of a single task, such as initiating a 
task, organizing time, space and materials for a task, pacing task 
performance, and carrying out, completing, and sustaining a task. 
Inclusions: undertaking a simple or complex task; undertaking a single 
task independently or in a group 
Exclusions: acquiring skills (d155); solving problems (d175); making 
decisions  (d177); undertaking multiple tasks (d220) 
d 2100  Undertaking a simple task  
Preparing, initiating and arranging the time and space required 
for a simple task; executing a simple task with a single major 
component, such as reading a book, writing a letter, or making 
one’s bed. 
d 2101  Undertaking a complex task  
Preparing, initiating and arranging the time and space for a 
single complex task; executing a complex task with more than 
one component, which may be carried out in sequence or 
simultaneously, such as arranging the furniture in one's home 
or completing an assignment for school. 
d 2102  Undertaking a single task independently  
Preparing, initiating and arranging the time and space for a 
simple or complex task; managing and executing a task on 
one’s own and without the assistance of others. 
d 2103  Undertaking a single task in a group  
Preparing, initiating and arranging the time and space for a 
single task, simple or complex;  managing and executing a 
task with people who are involved in some or all steps of the 
task. 
d 2108  Undertaking single tasks, other specified  
d 2109  Undertaking single tasks, unspecified  
133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
 d 220   Undertaking multiple tasks 
ICF 
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions as components 
of multiple, integrated and complex tasks in sequence or 
simultaneously. 
Inclusions:  undertaking multiple tasks; completing multiple tasks; 
undertaking multiple tasks independently and in a group 
Exclusions: acquiring skills (d155); solving problems (d175); making 
decisions (d177); undertaking a single task (d210) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 2200  Carrying out multiple tasks  
Preparing, initiating and arranging the time and space needed 
for several tasks, and managing and executing several tasks, 
together or sequentially. 
d 2201  Completing multiple tasks  
Completing several tasks, together or sequentially. 
d 2202  Undertaking multiple tasks independently  
Preparing, initiating and arranging the time and space for 
multiple tasks, and managing and executing several tasks 
together or sequentially, on one’s own and without the 
assistance of others. 
d 2203  Undertaking multiple tasks in a group  
Preparing, initiating and arranging the time and space for 
multiple tasks, and managing and executing several tasks 
together or sequentially with others who are involved in some 
or all steps of the multiple tasks. 
d 2208  Undertaking multiple tasks, other specified  
d 2209  Undertaking multiple tasks, unspecified  
 d 230   Carrying out daily routine 
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions in order to 
plan, manage and complete the requirements of day-to-day procedures 
or duties, such as budgeting time and making plans for separate 
activities throughout the day. 
Inclusions:  managing and completing the daily routine; managing 
one's own activity level 
Exclusion: undertaking multiple tasks (d220) 
 
 
134 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
d 2301  Managing daily routine  
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions in 
order to plan and manage the requirements of day-to-day 
procedures or duties. 
d 2302  Completing the daily routine  
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions in 
order to complete the requirements of day-to-day procedures 
or duties, such as getting dressed, eating breakfast, leaving for school or work and returning home at the end of the day. 
d 2303  Managing one's own activity level  
Carrying out actions and behaviours to arrange the 
requirements in energy and time day-to-day procedures or 
duties. 
d 2308  Carrying out daily routine, other specified  
d 2309  Carrying out daily routine, unspecified
d2304 Adapting to changes in daily routine
Interrupting and shifting tasks and actions in response to new requirements or making a transition from a usual pattern of activities to a new set of activities as a means of fulfilling daily tasks.
 
 
 
 
 
 d 240   Handling stress and other psychological demands 
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions to manage and 
control the psychological demands required to carry out tasks 
demanding significant responsibilities and involving stress, distraction, 
or crises, such as driving a vehicle during heavy traffic or taking care 
of many children. 
Inclusions:  handling responsibilities; handling stress and crisis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 2400  Handling responsibilities  
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions to 
manage the duties of task performance and to assess the 
requirements of these duties. 
d 2401  Handling stress  
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions to 
cope with pressure, emergencies or stress associated with task 
performance. 
d 2402  Handling crisis  
Carrying out simple or complex and coordinated actions to 
cope with decisive turning points in a situation or times of 
acute danger or difficulty. 
d 2408  Handling stress and other psychological demands, other 
specified  
135 
Activities and Participation 
 
ICF 
 
d 2409  Handling stress and other psychological demands, unspecified  
 d 298   General tasks and demands, other specified 
 
 d 299   General tasks and demands, unspecified 
 
 
136 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
Chapter 3   
Communication 
This chapter is about general and specific features of communicating by 
language, signs and symbols, including receiving and producing messages, 
carrying on conversations, and using communication devices and techniques. 
 
Communicating - receiving (d310-d329) 
 
 d 310   Communicating with - receiving - spoken messages 
Comprehending literal and implied meanings of messages in spoken 
language, such as  understanding that a statement asserts a fact or is an 
idiomatic expression. 
 
 d 315   Communicating with - receiving - nonverbal messages 
Comprehending the literal and implied meanings of messages 
conveyed by gestures, symbols and drawings, such as realizing that a 
child is tired when she rubs her eyes or that a warning bell means that 
there is a fire. 
Inclusions: communicating with - receiving - body gestures, general 
signs and symbols, drawings and photographs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 3150  Communicating with - receiving - body gestures  
Comprehending  the meaning conveyed by facial expressions, 
hand movements or signs, body postures, and other forms of 
body language. 
d 3151  Communicating with - receiving - general signs and symbols  
Comprehending the meaning represented by public signs and 
symbols, such as traffic signs, warning symbols, musical or 
scientific notations, and icons. 
d 3152  Communicating with - receiving - drawings and photographs  
Comprehending the meaning represented by drawings (e.g. 
line drawings, graphic designs, paintings, three-dimensional 
representations), graphs, charts and photographs, such as 
understanding that an upward line on a height chart indicates 
that a child is growing. 
d 3158  Communicating with - receiving - nonverbal messages, other 
specified  
d 3159  Communicating with - receiving - nonverbal messages, 
unspecified  
137 
Activities and Participation 
 
 d 320   Communicating with - receiving - formal sign language messages 
ICF 
Receiving and comprehending messages in formal sign language with 
literal and implied meaning. 
 
 d 325   Communicating with - receiving - written messages 
Comprehending the literal and implied meanings of messages that are 
conveyed through written language (including Braille), such as 
following political events in the daily newspaper or understanding the 
intent of religious scripture. 
 
 d 329   Communicating - receiving, other specified and unspecified 
 
Communicating - producing (d330-d349) 
 
 d 330   Speaking 
Producing words, phrases and longer passages in spoken messages 
with literal and implied meaning, such as expressing a fact or telling a 
story in oral language. 

 d331 Non-speech vocal expression 
Vocalising when aware of another person in the proximal environment, such as making a sound when the mother is close; babbling; babbling in turn-taking activities. Vocalising in response to speech through imitating speech-sounds in a turn taking procedure. 

 d332 Singing
Producing tones in a sequence resulting in a melody to convey messages.
 
 d 335   Producing nonverbal messages 
Using gestures, symbols and drawings to convey messages, such as 
shaking one's head to indicate disagreement or drawing a picture or 
diagram to convey a fact or complex idea. 
Inclusions:  producing body gestures, signs, symbols, drawings and 
photographs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 3350  Producing body language  
Conveying meaning by movements of the body, such as facial 
gestures (e.g. smiling, frowning, wincing), arm and hand 
movements, and postures (e.g. such as embracing to indicate 
affection). 
d 3351  Producing signs and symbols  
Conveying meaning by using signs and symbols (e.g. icons, 
Bliss board, scientific symbols) and symbolic notation 
systems, such as using musical notation to convey a melody. 
d 3352  Producing drawings and photographs  
Conveying meaning by drawing, painting, sketching, and 
making diagrams, pictures or photographs, such as drawing a 
map to give someone directions to a location. 
d 3358  Producing nonverbal messages, other specified  
138 
ICF 
 
d 3359  Producing nonverbal messages, unspecified  
Activities and Participation 
 d 340   Producing messages in formal sign language 
Conveying, with formal sign language, literal and implied meaning. 
 
 d 345   Writing messages 
Producing the literal and implied meanings of messages that are 
conveyed through written language, such as writing a letter to a friend. 
 
 d 349   Communication - producing, other specified and unspecified 
 
Conversation  and use of communication devices and 
techniques (d350-d369) 
 
 d 350   Conversation 
Starting, sustaining and ending an interchange of thoughts and ideas, 
carried out by means of spoken, written, sign or other forms of 
language, with one or more people one knows or who are strangers, in 
formal or casual settings. 
Inclusions: starting, sustaining and ending a conversation; conversing 
with one or many people 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 3500  Starting a conversation  
Beginning a dialogue or interchange, such as by introducing 
oneself, expressing customary greetings, and introducing a 
topic or asking questions. 
d 3501  Sustaining a conversation  
Continuing and shaping a dialogue or interchange by adding 
ideas, introducing a new topic or retrieving a topic that has 
been previously mentioned, as well as by taking turns in 
speaking or signing. 
d 3502  Ending a conversation  
Finishing a dialogue or  interchange with customary 
termination statements or expressions and by bringing closure 
to the topic under discussion. 
d 3503  Conversing with one person  
Initiating, maintaining, shaping and terminating a dialogue or 
interchange with one person, such as in discussing the weather 
with a friend. 
139 
Activities and Participation 
 
d 3504  Conversing with many people  
ICF 
Initiating, maintaining, shaping and terminating a dialogue or 
interchange with more than one individual, such as in starting 
and participating in a group interchange. 
 
 
 
d 3508  Conversation, other specified  
d 3509  Conversation, unspecified  
 d 355   Discussion 
Starting, sustaining and ending an examination of a matter, with 
arguments for or against, or debate carried out by means of spoken, 
written, sign or other forms of language, with one or more people one 
knows or who are strangers, in formal or casual settings. 
Inclusion: discussion with one person or many people 
d 3550  Discussion with one person  
Initiating, maintaining, shaping or terminating an argument or 
debate with one person. 
d 3551  Discussion with many people  
Initiating, maintaining, shaping or terminating an argument or 
debate with more than one individual. 
d 3558  Discussion, other specified  
d 3559  Discussion, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 d 360   Using communication devices and techniques 
Using devices, techniques and other means for the purposes of 
communicating, such as calling a friend on the telephone. 
Inclusions: using telecommunication devices, using writing machines 
and communication techniques 
 
 
 
 
d 3600  Using telecommunication devices  
Using telephones and other machines, such as facsimile or 
telex machines, as a means of communication. 
d 3601  Using writing machines  
Using machines for writing, such as typewriters, computers 
and Braille writers, as a means of communication. 
140 
ICF 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
d 3602  Using communication techniques  
Performing actions and tasks involved in techniques for 
communicating, such as reading lips. 
d 3608  Using communication devices and techniques, other specified  
d 3609  Using communication devices and techniques, unspecified  
 d 369   Conversation and use of communication devices and techniques, other 
 
specified and unspecified 
 d 398   Communication, other specified 
 
 d 399   Communication, unspecified 
 
 
141 
Activities and Participation 
 
Chapter 4   
Mobility 
ICF 
This chapter is about moving by changing body position or location or by 
transferring from one place to another, by carrying, moving or manipulating 
objects, by walking, running or climbing, and by using various forms of 
transportation. 
 
Changing and maintaining body position (d410-
d429) 
 
 d 410   Changing basic body position 
Getting into and out of a body position and moving from one location 
to another, such as getting up out of a chair to lie down on a bed, and 
getting into and out of positions of kneeling or squatting. 
Inclusion: changing body position from lying down, from squatting or 
kneeling, from sitting or standing, bending and shifting the body's 
centre of gravity 
Exclusion: transferring oneself (d420) 
d 4100  Lying down  
Getting into and out of a lying down position or changing 
body position from horizonal to any other position, such as 
standing up or sitting down. 
Inclusion: getting into a prostrate position 
d 4101  Squatting  
Getting into and out of the seated or crouched posture on one's 
haunches with knees closely drawn up or sitting on one's 
heels, such as may be necessary in toilets that are at floor 
level, or changing body position from squatting to any other 
position, such as standing up. 
d 4102  Kneeling  
Getting into and out of a position where the body is supported 
by the knees with legs bent, such as during prayers, or 
changing body position from kneeling to any other position, 
such as standing up. 
142 
 
 
 
 
 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
d 4103  Sitting  
Getting into and out of a seated position and changing body 
position from sitting down to any other position, such as 
standing up or lying down. 
Inclusions: getting into a sitting position with bent legs or 
cross-legged; getting into a sitting position with feet 
supported or unsupported 
d 4104  Standing  
Getting into and out of a standing position or changing body 
position from standing to any other position, such as lying 
down or sitting down. 
d 4105  Bending  
Tilting the back downwards or to the side, at the torso, such as 
in bowing or reaching down for an object. 
d 4106  Shifting the body's centre of gravity  
Adjusting or moving the weight of the body from one position 
to another while sitting, standing or lying, such as moving 
from one foot to another while standing. 
Exclusions:  transferring oneself (d420); walking  (d450) 
d 4108  Changing basic body position, other specified  
d 4109  Changing basic body position, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 d 415   Maintaining a body position 
Staying in the same body position as required, such as remaining 
seated or remaining standing for work or school. 
Inclusions: maintaining a lying, squatting, kneeling, sitting and 
standing position 
 
 
 
 
d 4150  Maintaining a lying position  
Staying in a lying position for some time as required, such as 
remaining in a prone position in a bed. 
Inclusions: staying in a prone (face down or  prostrate), 
supine (face upwards) or side-lying position 
d 4151  Maintaining a squatting position  
Staying in a squatting position for some time as required, such 
as when sitting on the floor without a seat. 
143 
Activities and Participation 
 
ICF 
d 4152  Maintaining a kneeling position  
Staying in a kneeling position where the body is supported by 
the knees with legs bent for some time as required, such as 
during prayers in church. 
 
 
 
 
 
d 4153  Maintaining a sitting position  
Staying in a seated position, on a seat or the floor, for some 
time as required, such as when sitting at a desk or table. 
Inclusions: staying in a sitting position with straight legs or 
cross-legged, with feet supported or unsupported 
d 4154  Maintaining a standing position  
Staying in a standing position for some time as required, such 
as when standing in a queue. 
Inclusions: staying in a standing position on a slope, on 
slippery or hard surfaces 
d 4158  Maintaining a body position, other specified  
d 4159  Maintaining a body position, unspecified  
 d 420   Transferring oneself 
Moving from one surface to another, such as sliding along a bench or 
moving from a bed to a chair, without changing body position. 
Inclusions: transferring oneself while sitting or lying 
Exclusion: changing basic body position (d410) 
d 4200  Transferring oneself while sitting  
Moving from a sitting position on one seat to another seat on 
the same or a different level, such as moving from a chair to a 
bed. 
Inclusions:  moving from a chair to another seat, such as a 
toilet seat; moving from a wheelchair to a car seat 
Exclusion:  changing basic body position (d410) 
d 4201  Transferring oneself while lying  
Moving from one lying position to another on the same or a 
different level, such as moving from one bed to another. 
Exclusion: changing basic  body position (d410) 
d 4208  Transferring oneself, other specified  
d 4209  Transferring oneself, unspecified  
144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
 d 429   Changing and maintaining body position, other specified and 
 
unspecified 
Carrying, moving and handling objects (d430-d449) 
 
 d 430   Lifting and carrying objects 
Raising up an object or taking something from one place to another, 
such as when lifting a cup or carrying a child from one room to 
another. 
Inclusions: lifting, carrying in the hands or arms, or on shoulders, hip, 
back or head; putting down 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 4300  Lifting  
Raising up an object in order to move it from a lower to a 
higher level, such as when lifting a glass from the table. 
d 4301  Carrying in the hands  
Taking or transporting an object from one place to another 
using the hands, such as when carrying a drinking glass or a 
suitcase. 
d 4302  Carrying in the arms  
Taking or transporting an object from one place to another 
using the arms and hands, such as when carrying a child. 
d 4303  Carrying on shoulders, hip and back  
Taking or transporting an object from one place to another 
using the shoulders, hip or back, or some combination of 
these, such as when carrying a large parcel. 
d 4304  Carrying on the head  
Taking or transporting an object from one place to another 
using the head, such when as carrying a container of water on 
the head. 
d 4305  Putting down objects  
Using hands, arms or other parts of the body to place an object 
down on a surface or place, such as when lowering a container 
of water to the ground. 
d 4308  Lifting and carrying, other specified  
d 4309  Lifting and carrying, unspecified  
145 
Activities and Participation 
 
 d 435   Moving objects with lower extremities 
ICF 
Performing coordinated actions aimed at moving an object by using the 
legs and feet, such as kicking a ball or pushing pedals on a bicycle. 
Inclusions: pushing with lower extremities; kicking 
 
 
 
 
 
d 4350  Pushing with lower extremities  
Using the legs and feet to exert a force on an object to move it 
away, such as pushing a chair away with a foot. 
d 4351  Kicking  
Using the legs and feet to propel something away, such as 
kicking a ball. 
d 4358  Moving objects with lower extremities, other specified  
d 4359  Moving objects with lower extremities, unspecified  
 d 440   Fine hand use 
Performing the coordinated actions of handling objects, picking up, 
manipulating and releasing them using one's hand, fingers and thumb, 
such as required to lift coins off a table or turn a dial or knob. 
Inclusions: picking up, grasping, manipulating and releasing 
Exclusion: lifting and carrying objects  (d430) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 4400  Picking up  
Lifting or taking up a small object with hands and fingers, 
such as when picking up a pencil. 
d 4401  Grasping  
Using one or both hands to seize and hold something, such as 
when grasping a tool or a door knob. 
d 4402  Manipulating  
Using fingers and hands to exert control over, direct or guide 
something, such as when handling coins or other small 
objects. 
d 4403  Releasing  
Using fingers and hands to let go or set free something so that 
it falls or changes position, such as when dropping an item of 
clothing. 
d 4408  Fine hand use, other specified  
146 
ICF 
 
d 4409  Fine hand use, unspecified  
 d 445   Hand and arm use 
Activities and Participation 
Performing the coordinated actions required to move objects or to 
manipulate them by using hands and arms, such as when turning door 
handles or throwing or catching an object. 
Inclusions:  pulling or pushing objects; reaching; turning or twisting 
the hands or arms; throwing; catching 
Exclusion:   fine hand use (d440) 
d 4450  Pulling  
Using fingers, hands and arms to bring an object towards 
oneself, or to move it from place to place, such as when 
pulling a door closed. 
d 4451  Pushing  
Using fingers, hands and arms to move something from 
oneself, or to move it from place to place, such as when 
pushing an animal away. 
d 4452  Reaching 
Using the hands and arms to extend outwards and touch and 
grasp something, such as when reaching across a table or desk 
for a book. 
d 4453  Turning or twisting the hands or arms  
Using fingers, hands and arms to rotate, turn or bend an 
object, such as is required to use tools or utensils. 
d 4454  Throwing  
Using fingers, hands and arms to lift something and propel it 
with some force through the air, such as when tossing a ball. 
d 4455  Catching  
Using fingers, hands and arms to grasp a moving object in 
order to bring it to a stop and hold it, such as when catching a 
ball. 
d 4458  Hand and arm use, other specified  
d 4459  Hand and arm use, unspecified  
d446 Fine foot use
Performing the coordinated actions to move or manipulate objects using one's foot and toes.
d451 Going up and down stairs
Moving upwards and downwards so that at least one foot is always on the ground such as ascending and descending stairs or curbs.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 d 449   Carrying, moving and handling objects, other specified and unspecified 
 
 
147 
Activities and Participation 
 
 
Walking and moving (d450-d469) 
 
 d 450   Walking 
ICF 
Moving along a surface on foot, step by step, so that one foot is always 
on the ground, such as when strolling, sauntering, walking forwards, 
backwards, or sideways. 
Inclusions: walking short or long distances; walking on different 
surfaces; walking around obstacles 
Exclusions:  transferring oneself (d420); moving around (d455) 
d 4500  Walking short distances  
Walking for less than a kilometre, such as walking around 
rooms or hallways, within a building or for short distances 
outside.  
d 4501  Walking long distances  
Walking for more than a kilometre, such as across a village or 
town, between villages or across open areas. 
d 4502  Walking on different surfaces  
Walking on sloping, uneven, or moving surfaces, such as on 
grass, gravel or ice and snow, or walking aboard a ship, train 
or other vehicle. 
d 4503  Walking around obstacles  
Walking in ways required to avoid moving and immobile 
objects, people, animals, and vehicles, such as walking around 
a marketplace or shop, around or through traffic or other 
crowded areas. 
d 4508  Walking, other specified  
d 4509  Walking, unspecified  
148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
 d 455   Moving around 
Moving the whole body from one place to another by means other than 
walking, such as climbing over a rock or running down a street, 
skipping, scampering, jumping, somersaulting or running around 
obstacles. 
Inclusions: crawling, climbing, running, jogging, jumping, and 
swimming 
Exclusions:  transferring oneself (d420); walking  (d450) 
d 4550  Crawling  
Moving the whole body in a prone position from one place to 
another on hands, or hands and arms, and knees. 
d 4551  Climbing  
Moving the whole body upwards or downwards, over surfaces 
or objects, such as climbing steps, rocks, ladders or stairs, 
curbs or other objects. 
d 4552  Running  
Moving with quick steps so that both feet may be 
simultaneously off the ground. 
d 4553  Jumping  
Moving up off the ground by bending and extending the legs, 
such as jumping on one foot, hopping, skipping and jumping 
or diving into water. 
d 4554  Swimming  
Propelling the whole body through water by means of limb 
and body movements without taking support from the ground 
underneath. 
d 4558  Moving around, other specified  
d 4559  Moving around, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 d 460   Moving around in different locations 
Walking  and moving around in various places and situations, such as 
walking between rooms in a house, within a building, or down the 
street of a town. 
Inclusions: moving around within the home, crawling or climbing 
within the home; walking or moving within buildings other than the 
home, and outside the home and other buildings 
 
 
149 
Activities and Participation 
 
ICF 
d 4600  Moving around within the home  
Walking and moving around in one's home, within a room, 
between rooms, and around the whole residence or living area. 
Inclusions: moving from floor to floor, on an attached 
balcony, courtyard, porch or garden 
 
 
 
 
 
d 4601  Moving around within buildings other than home  
Walking and moving around within buildings other than one's 
residence, such as moving around other people's homes, other 
private buildings, community and private or public buildings 
and enclosed areas. 
Inclusions: moving throughout all parts of buildings and 
enclosed areas, between floors, inside, outside and around 
buildings, both public and private 
d 4602  Moving around outside the home and other buildings  
Walking and moving around close to or far from one's home 
and other buildings, without the use of transportation, public 
or private, such as walking for short or long distances around 
a town or village. 
Inclusions: walking or moving down streets in the 
neighbourhood, town, village or city; moving between cities 
and further distances, without using transportation 
d 4608  Moving around in different locations, other specified  
d 4609  Moving around in different locations, unspecified  
 d 465   Moving around using equipment 
Moving the whole body from place to place, on any surface or space, 
by using specific devices designed to facilitate moving or create other 
ways of moving around, such as with skates, skis, or scuba equipment, 
or moving down the street in a wheelchair or a walker. 
Exclusions: transferring oneself (d420); walking (d450); moving 
around (d455); using transportation (d470); driving (d475) 
 
 d 469   Walking and moving, other specified and unspecified 
 
Moving around using transportation (d470-d489) 
 
 
150 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
 d 470   Using transportation 
Using transportation to move around as a passenger, such as being 
driven in a car or on a bus, rickshaw, jitney, animal-powered vehicle, 
or private or public taxi, bus, train, tram, subway, boat or aircraft. 
Inclusions: using human-powered transportation; using private 
motorized or public transportation 
Exclusions: moving around using equipment (d465); driving (d475) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 4700  Using human-powered vehicles  
Being transported as a passenger by a mode of transportation 
powered by one or more people, such as riding in a rickshaw 
or rowboat. 
d 4701  Using private motorized transportation  
Being transported as a passenger by private motorized vehicle 
over land, sea or air, such as by a taxi or privately owned 
aircraft or boat. 
d 4702  Using public motorized transportation  
Being transported as a passenger by a motorized vehicle over 
land, sea or air designed for public transportation, such as 
being a passenger on a bus, train, subway or aircraft. 
d 4708  Using transportation, other specified  
d 4709  Using transportation, unspecified  
 d 475   Driving 
Being in control of and moving a vehicle or the animal that draws it, 
travelling under one’s own direction or having at one’s disposal any 
form of transportation, such as a car, bicycle, boat or animal-powered 
vehicle. 
Inclusions: driving human-powered transportation, motorized vehicles, 
animal-powered vehicles 
Exclusions: moving around using equipment (d465); using 
transportation (d470) 
d 4750  Driving human-powered transportation  
Driving a human-powered vehicle, such as a bicycle, tricycle, 
or rowboat. 
d 4751  Driving motorized vehicles  
Driving a vehicle with a motor, such as an automobile, 
motorcycle, motorboat or aircraft. 
151 
 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
ICF 
d 4752  Driving animal-powered vehicles  
Driving a vehicle powered by an animal, such as a horse-
drawn cart or carriage. 
 
 
 
d 4758  Driving, other specified  
d 4759  Driving, unspecified  
 d 480   Riding animals for transportation 
travelling on the back of an animal, such as a horse, ox, camel or 
elephant 
Exclusions: driving (d475); recreation and leisure (d920) 
 
 d 489   Moving around using transportation, other specified and unspecified 
 
 d 498   Mobility, other specified 
 
 d 499   Mobility, unspecified 
 
 
152 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
Chapter 5   
Self-care 
This chapter is about caring for oneself, washing and drying oneself, caring for 
one's body and body parts, dressing, eating and drinking, and looking after one’s 
health. 
 
 d 510   Washing oneself 
Washing and drying one’s whole body, or body parts, using water and 
appropriate cleaning and drying materials or methods, such as bathing, 
showering, washing hands and feet, face and hair, and drying with a 
towel. 
Inclusions: washing body parts, the whole body; and drying oneself 
Exclusions: caring for body parts (d520); toileting (d530) 
d 5100  Washing body parts  
Applying water, soap and other substances to body parts, such 
as hands, face, feet, hair or nails, in order to clean them. 
d 5101  Washing whole body  
Applying water, soap and other substances to the whole body 
in order to clean oneself, such as taking a bath or shower. 
d 5102  Drying oneself  
Using a towel or other means for drying some part or parts of 
one's body, or the whole body, such as after washing. 
d 5108  Washing oneself, other specified  
d 5109  Washing oneself, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 d 520   Caring for body parts 
Looking afer those parts of the body, such as skin, face, teeth, scalp, 
nails and genitals, that require more than washing and drying. 
Inclusions: caring for skin, teeth, hair, finger and toe nails 
Exclusions:  washing oneself (d510); toileting (d530) 
 
 
Caring for ears
Looking after those parts of the body, such as skin, face, teeth, scalp, nails and genitals, that require more than washing and drying. 

d 5200  Caring for skin  
Looking after the texture and hydration of one's skin, such as 
by removing calluses or corns and using moisturizing lotions 
or cosmetics. 
153 
Activities and Participation 
 
d 5201  Caring for teeth  
ICF 
Looking after dental hygiene, such as by brushing teeth, 
flossing, and taking care of a dental prosthesis or orthosis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 5202  Caring for hair  
Looking after the hair on the head and face, such as by 
combing, styling, shaving, or trimming. 
d 5203  Caring for fingernails  
Cleaning, trimming or polishing the nails of the fingers. 
d 5204  Caring for toenails  
Cleaning, trimming or polishing the nails of the toes. 
d 5208  Caring for body parts, other specified  
d 5209  Caring for body parts, unspecified 
d5205 Caring for nose 
Cleaning the nose, looking after nasal hygiene.

 d 530   Toileting 
Planning and carrying out the elimination of human waste 
(menstruation, urination and defecation), and cleaning oneself 
afterwards. 
Inclusions: regulating urination, defecation and menstrual care 
Exclusions: washing oneself (d510); caring for body parts (d520) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 5300  Regulating urination  
Coordinating and managing urination, such as by indicating 
need, getting into the proper position, choosing and getting to 
an appropriate place for urination, manipulating clothing 
before and after urination, and cleaning oneself after urination. 
d 5301  Regulating defecation  
Coordinating and managing defecation such as by indicating 
need, getting into the proper position, choosing and getting to 
an appropriate place for defecation, manipulating clothing 
before and after defecation, and cleaning onself after 
defecation. 
d 5302  Menstrual care  
Coordinating, planning and caring for menstruation, such as 
by anticipating menstruation and using sanitary towels and 
napkins. 
d 5308  Toileting, other specified  
154 
ICF 
 
d 5309  Toileting, unspecified  
 d 540   Dressing 
Activities and Participation 
Carrying out the coordinated actions and tasks of putting on and taking 
off clothes and footwear in sequence and in keeping with climatic and 
social conditions, such as by putting on, adjusting and removing shirts, 
skirts, blouses, pants, undergarments, saris, kimono, tights, hats, 
gloves, coats, shoes, boots, sandals and slippers. 
Inclusions: putting on or taking off clothes and footwear and choosing 
appropriate clothing 
d 5400  Putting on clothes  
Carrying out the coordinated tasks of putting clothes on 
various parts of the body, such as putting clothes on over the 
head, over the arms and shoulders, and on the lower and upper 
halves of the body; putting on gloves and headgear. 
d 5401  Taking off clothes  
Carrying out the coordinated tasks of taking clothes off 
various parts of the body, such as pulling clothes off and over 
the head, off the arms and shoulders, and off the lower and 
upper halves of the body; taking off gloves and headgear. 
d 5402  Putting on footwear  
Carrying out the coordinated tasks of putting on socks, 
stockings and footwear. 
d 5403  Taking off footwear  
Carrying out the coordinated tasks of taking off socks, 
stockings and footwear. 
d 5404  Choosing appropriate clothing  
Following implicit or explicit dress codes and conventions of 
one's society or culture and dressing in keeping with climatic 
conditions. 
d 5408  Dressing, other specified  
d 5409  Dressing, unspecified  
155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
 d 550   Eating 
ICF 
Carrying out the coordinated tasks and actions of eating food that has 
been served, bringing it to the mouth and consuming it in culturally 
acceptable ways, cutting or breaking food into pieces, opening bottles 
and cans, using eating implements, having meals, feasting or dining. 
Exclusion: drinking (d560) 
 
 d 560   Drinking 
Taking hold of a drink, bringing it to the mouth, and consuming the 
drink in culturally acceptable ways, mixing, stirring and pouring 
liquids for drinking, opening bottles and cans, drinking through a straw 
or drinking running water such as from a tap or a spring; feeding from 
the breast. 
Exclusion:   eating (d550) 
 
 d 570   Looking after one’s health 
Ensuring physical comfort, health and physical and mental well-being, 
such as by maintaining a balanced diet, and an appropriate level of 
physical activity, keeping warm or cool, avoiding harms to health, 
following safe sex practices, including using condoms, getting 
immunizations and regular physical examinations. 
Inclusions: ensuring one's physical comfort; managing diet and fitness; 
maintaining one's health 
d 5700  Ensuring one’s physical comfort  
Caring for oneself by being aware that one needs to ensure, 
and ensuring, that one's body is in a comfortable position, that 
one is not feeling too hot or cold, and that one has adequate 
lighting. 
d 5701  Managing diet and fitness  
Caring for oneself by being aware of the need and by selecting 
and consuming nutritious foods and maintaining physical 
fitness. 
d 5702  Maintaining one's health  
Caring for oneself by being aware of the need and doing what 
is required to look after one's health, both to respond to risks 
to health and to prevent ill-health, such as by seeking 
professional assistance; following medical and other health 
advice; and avoiding risks to health such as physical injury, 
communicable diseases, drug-taking and sexually transmitted 
diseases. 
156 
 
 
 
 
 
ICF 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
d 5708  Looking after one’s health, other specified  
d 5709  Looking after one’s health, unspecified  
 d 598   Self-care, other specified 
 
 d 599   Self-care, unspecified 
 
 
157 
Activities and Participation 
 
Chapter 6   
Domestic life 
ICF 
This chapter is about carrying out domestic and everyday actions and tasks. 
Areas of domestic life include acquiring a place to live, food, clothing and other 
necessities, household cleaning and repairing, caring for personal and other 
household objects, and assisting others. 
 
Acquisition of necessities  (d610-d629) 
 
 d 610   Acquiring a place to live 
Buying, renting, furnishing and arranging a house, apartment or other 
dwelling. 
Inclusions: buying or renting a place to live and furnishing a place to 
live 
Exclusions: acquisition of goods and services (d620); caring for 
household objects (d650) 
d 6100  Buying a place to live  
Acquiring ownership of a house, apartment or other dwelling. 
d 6101  Renting a place to live  
Acquiring the use of a house, apartment or other dwelling 
belonging to another in exchange for payment. 
d 6102  Furnishing a place to live  
Equipping and arranging a living space with furniture, fixtures 
and other fittings and decorating rooms. 
d 6108  Acquiring a place to live, other specified  
d 6109  Acquiring a place to live, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 d 620   Acquisition of goods and services 
Selecting, procuring and transporting all goods and services required 
for daily living, such as selecting, procuring, transporting and storing 
food, drink, clothing, cleaning materials, fuel, household items, 
utensils, cooking ware, domestic appliance and tools; procuring 
utilities and other household services,and picking up and delivering paper mail or packages.  
Inclusions: shopping and gathering daily necessities 
Exclusion: acquiring a place to live (d610) 
 
 
158 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
d 6200  Shopping  
Obtaining, in exchange for money, goods and services 
required for daily living (including instructing and supervising 
an intermediary to do the shopping), such as selecting food, 
drink, cleaning materials, household items or clothing in a 
shop or market; comparing quality and price of the items 
required, negotiating and  paying for selected goods or 
services, and transporting goods. 
d 6201  Gathering daily necessities  
Obtaining, without exchange of money, goods and services 
required for daily living (including instructing and supervising 
an intermediate to gather daily necessities), such as by 
harvesting vegetables and fruits and getting water and fuel. 
d 6208  Acquisition of goods and services, other specified  
d 6209  Acquisition of goods and services, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 d 629   Acquisition of necessities, other specified and unspecified 
 
Household  tasks (d630-d649) 
 
 d 630   Preparing meals 
Planning, organizing, cooking and serving simple and complex meals 
for oneself and others, such as by making a menu, selecting edible food 
and drink, getting together ingredients for preparing meals, cooking 
with heat and preparing cold foods and drinks, and serving the food. 
Inclusions: preparing simple and complex meals 
Exclusions: eating (d550); drinking (d560); acquisition of goods and 
services (d620); doing housework (d640); caring for household objects 
(d650); caring for others (d660) 
d 6300  Preparing simple meals  
Organizing, cooking and serving meals with a small number 
of ingredients that require easy methods of preparation and 
serving, such as making a snack or small meal, and 
transforming food ingredients by cutting and stirring, boiling 
and heating food such as rice or potatoes. 
159 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
d 6301  Preparing complex meals  
ICF 
Planning, organizing, cooking and serving meals with a large 
number of ingredients that require complex methods of 
preparation and serving, such as planning a meal with several 
dishes, and transforming food ingredients by combined 
actions of peeling, slicing, mixing, kneading, stirring, 
presenting and serving food in a manner appropriate to the 
occasion and culture. 
Exclusion: using household appliances (d6403) 
 
 
 
d 6308  Preparing meals, other specified  
d 6309  Preparing meals, unspecified  
 d 640   Doing housework 
Managing a household by cleaning the house, washing clothes, using 
household appliances, storing food and disposing of garbage, such as 
by sweeping, mopping, washing counters, walls and other surfaces; 
collecting and disposing of household garbage; tidying rooms, closets 
and drawers; collecting, washing, drying, folding and ironing clothes; 
cleaning footwear; using brooms, brushes and vacuum cleaners; using 
washing machines, driers and irons. 
Inclusions: washing and drying clothes and garments; cleaning 
cooking area and utensils; cleaning living area; using household 
appliances, storing daily necessities and disposing of garbage 
Exclusions: acquiring a place to live (d610); acquisition of goods and 
services (d620);  preparing meals (d630); caring for household objects 
(d650); caring for others (d660) 
d 6400  Washing and drying clothes and garments  
Washing clothes and garments by hand and hanging them out 
to dry in the air. 
d 6401  Cleaning cooking area and utensils  
Cleaning up after cooking, such as by washing dishes, pans, 
pots and cooking utensils, and cleaning tables and floors 
around cooking and eating area. 
d 6402  Cleaning living area  
Cleaning the living areas of the household, such as by tidying 
and dusting, sweeping, swabbing, mopping floors, cleaning 
windows and walls, cleaning bathrooms and toilets, cleaning 
household furnishings. 
160 
 
 
 
 
 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
d 6403  Using household appliances  
Using all kinds of household appliances, such as washing 
machines, driers, irons, vacuum cleaners and dishwashers. 
d 6404  Storing daily necessities  
Storing food, drinks, clothes and other household goods 
required for daily living; preparing food for conservation by 
canning, salting or refrigerating, keeping food fresh and out of 
the reach of animals. 
d 6405  Disposing of garbage  
Disposing of household garbage such as by collecting trash 
and rubbish around the house, preparing garbage for disposal, 
using garbage disposal appliances; burning garbage. 
d 6408  Doing housework, other specified  
d 6409  Doing housework, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 d 649   Household tasks, other specified and unspecified 
 
Caring for household objects and assisting others 
(d650-d669) 
 
 d 650   Caring for household objects 
Maintaining and repairing household and other personal objects, 
including house and contents, clothes, vehicles and assistive devices, 
and caring for plants and animals, such as painting or wallpapering 
rooms, fixing furniture, repairing plumbing, ensuring the proper 
working order of vehicles, watering plants, grooming and feeding pets 
and domestic animals. 
Inclusions: making and repairing clothes; maintaining dwelling, 
furnishings and domestic appliances; maintaining vehicles; 
maintaining assistive devices; taking care of plants (indoor and 
outdoor) and animals and taking care of entrances, walkways and driveways. 
Exclusions: acquiring a place to live (d610); acquisition of goods and 
services (d620); doing housework (d640); caring for others (d660); 
remunerative employment (d850) 
d 6500  Making and repairing clothes  
Making and repairing clothes, such as by sewing, producing 
or mending clothes; reattaching buttons and fasteners; ironing 
clothes, fixing and polishing footwear. 
Exclusion: using household appliances (d6403) 
161 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
ICF 
d 6501  Maintaining dwelling and furnishings  
Repairing and taking care of dwelling, its exterior, interior and 
contents, such as by painting, repairing fixtures and furniture, 
and using required tools for repair work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 6502  Maintaining domestic appliances  
Repairing and taking care of all domestic appliances for 
cooking, cleaning and repairing, such as by oiling and 
repairing tools and maintaining the washing machine. 
d 6503  Maintaining vehicles  
Repairing and taking care of motorized and non-motorized 
vehicles for personal use, including bicycles, carts, 
automobiles and boats. 
d 6504  Maintaining assistive devices  
Repairing and taking care of assistive devices, such as 
prostheses, orthoses and specialized tools and aids for 
housekeeping and personal care; maintaining and repairing 
aids for personal mobility such as canes, walkers, wheelchairs 
and scooters; and maintaining communication and recreational 
aids. 
d 6505  Taking care of plants, indoors and outdoors  
Taking care of plants inside and outside the house, such as by 
planting, watering and fertilizing plants; gardening and 
growing foods for personal use. 
d 6506  Taking care of animals  
Taking care of domestic animals and pets, such as by feeding, 
cleaning, grooming and exercising pets; watching over the 
health of animals or pets; planning for the care of animals or 
pets in one's absence. 
d 6508  Caring for household objects, specified  
d 6509  Caring for household objects, unspecified  
162 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
 d 660   Assisting others 
Assisting household members and others with their learning, 
communicating, self-care, movement, within the house or outside; 
being concerned about the well-being of household members and 
others. 
Inclusions: assisting others with self-care, movement, communication, 
interpersonal relations, nutrition and health maintenance 
Exclusion: remunerative employment (d850) 
d 6600  Assisting others with self-care  
Assisting household members and others in performing self-
care, including helping others with eating, bathing and 
dressing; taking care of children or members of the household 
who are sick or have difficulties with basic self-care; helping 
others with their toileting. 
d 6601  Assisting others in movement  
Assisting household members and others in movements and in 
moving outside the home, such as in the neighbourhood or 
city, to or from school, place of employment or other 
destination. 
d 6602  Assisting others in communication  
Assisting household members and others with their 
communication, such as by helping with speaking, writing or 
reading. 
d 6603  Assisting others in interpersonal relations  
Assisting household members and others with their 
interpersonal interactions, such as by helping them to initiate, 
maintain or terminate relationships. 
d 6604  Assisting others in nutrition  
Assisting household members and others with their nutrition, 
such as by helping them to prepare and eat meals. 
d 6605  Assisting others in health maintenance  
Assisting household members and others with formal and 
informal health care, such as by ensuring that a child gets 
regular medical check-ups, or that an elderly relative takes 
required medication. 
d 6608  Assisting others, other specified  
d 6609  Assisting others, unspecified  
163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
 d 669   Caring for household objects and assisting others, other specified and 
ICF 
 
unspecified 
 d 698   Domestic life, other specified 
 
 d 699   Domestic life, unspecified 
 
 
164 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
Chapter 7   
Interpersonal interactions and 
relationships 
This chapter is about carrying out the actions and tasks required for basic and 
complex interactions with people (strangers, friends, relatives, family members 
and lovers) in a contextually and socially appropriate manner. 
 
General interpersonal interactions (d710-d729) 
 
 d 710   Basic interpersonal interactions 
Interacting with people in a contextually and socially appropriate 
manner, such as by showing consideration and esteem when 
appropriate, or responding to the feelings of others. 
Inclusions: showing respect, warmth, appreciation, and tolerance in 
relationships; responding to criticism and social cues in relationships; 
and using appropriate physical contact in relationships 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 7100  Respect and warmth in relationships  
Showing and responding to consideration and esteem, in a 
contextually and socially appropriate manner. 
d 7101  Appreciation in relationships  
Showing and responding to satisfaction and gratitude, in a 
contextually and socially appropriate manner. 
d 7102  Tolerance in relationships  
Showing and responding to understanding and acceptance of 
behaviour, in a contextually and socially appropriate manner. 
d 7103  Criticism in relationships  
Providing and responding to implicit and explicit differences 
of opinion or disagreement, in a contextually and socially 
appropriate manner. 
d 7104  Social cues in relationships  
Giving and reacting appropriately to signs and hints that occur 
in social interactions. 
d 7105  Physical contact in relationships  
Making and responding to bodily contact with others, in a 
contextually and socially appropriate manner. 
165 
Activities and Participation 
 
 
 
d 7108  Basic interpersonal interactions, other specified  
d 7109  Basic interpersonal interactions, unspecified  
ICF 
 d 720   Complex interpersonal interactions 
Maintaining and managing interactions with other people, in a 
contextually and socially appropriate manner, such as by regulating 
emotions and impulses, controlling verbal and physical aggression, 
acting independently in social interactions, and acting in accordance 
with social rules and conventions, when for example playing, studying or working with others. 
Inclusions: forming and terminating relationships; regulating 
behaviours within interactions; interacting according to social rules; 
and maintaining social space 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 7200  Forming relationships  
Beginning and maintaining interactions with others for a short 
or long period of time, in a contextually and socially 
appropriate manner, such as by introducing oneself, finding 
and establishing friendships and professional relationships, 
starting a relationship that may become permanent, romantic 
or intimate. 
d 7201  Terminating relationships  
Bringing interactions to a close in a contextually and socially 
appropriate manner, such as by ending temporary 
relationships at the end of a visit, ending long-term 
relationships with friends when moving to a new town or 
ending relationships with work colleagues, professional 
colleagues and service providers, and ending romantic or 
intimate relationships. 
d 7202  Regulating behaviours within interactions  
Regulating emotions and impulses, verbal aggression and 
physical aggression in interactions with others, in a 
contextually and socially appropriate manner. 
d 7203 
Interacting according to social rules  
Acting independently in social interactions and complying 
with social conventions governing one's role, position or other 
social status in interactions with others. 
d 7204  Maintaining social space  
Being aware of and maintaining a distance between oneself 
and others that is contextually, socially and culturally 
appropriate. 
166 
ICF 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
d 7208  Complex interpersonal interactions, other specified  
d 7209  Complex interpersonal interactions, unspecified  
 d 729   General interpersonal interactions, other specified and unspecified 
 
Particular interpersonal relationships (d730-d779) 
 
 d 730   Relating with strangers 
Engaging in temporary contacts and links with strangers for specific 
purposes, such as when asking for directions or making a purchase. 
Engaging in temporary contacts and links with strangers for specific purposes, such as when asking for information, directions or making a purchase. 
 
 d 740   Formal relationships 
Creating and maintaining specific relationships in formal settings, such 
as with employers, professionals or service providers. 
Inclusions: relating with persons in authority, with subordinates and 
with equals 
d 7400  Relating with persons in authority  
Creating and maintaining formal relations with people in 
positions of power or of a higher rank or prestige relative to 
one's own social position, such as an employer. 
d 7401  Relating with subordinates  
Creating and maintaining formal relations with people in 
positions of lower rank or prestige relative to one's own social 
position, such as an employee or servant. 
d 7402  Relating with equals  
Creating and maintaining formal relations with people in the 
same position of authority, rank or prestige relative to one's 
own social position. 
d 7408  Formal relationships, other specified  
d 7409  Formal relationships, other unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 d 750  
Informal social relationships 
Entering into relationships with others, such as casual relationships 
with people living in the same community or residence, or with co-
workers, students, playmates or people with similar backgrounds or 
professions. 
Inclusions: informal relationships with friends, neighbours, 
acquaintances, co-inhabitants and peers 
 
 
167 
Activities and Participation 
 
ICF 
d 7500 
Informal relationships with friends  
Creating and maintaining friendship relationships that are 
characterized by mutual esteem and common interests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 7501 
Informal relationships with neighbours  
Creating and maintaining informal relationships with people 
who live in nearby dwellings or living areas. 
d 7502 
Informal relationships with acquaintances  
Creating and maintaining informal relationships with people 
whom one knows but who are not close friends. 
d 7503 
Informal relationships with co-inhabitants  
Creating and maintaining informal relationships with people 
who are co-inhabitants of a house or other dwelling, privately 
or publicly run, for any purpose. 
d 7504 
Informal relationships with peers  
Creating and maintaining informal relationships with people 
who share the same age, interest or other common feature. 
d 7508 
Informal social relationships, other specified  
d 7509 
Informal social relationships, unspecified  
 d 760   Family relationships 
Creating and maintaining kinship relationships, such as with members 
of the nuclear family, extended family, foster and adopted family and 
step-relationships, more distant relationships such as second cousins, or 
legal guardians. 
Inclusions: parent-child and child-parent relationships, sibling and 
extended family relationships 
 
 
 
 
d 7600  Parent-child relationships  
Becoming and being a parent, both natural and adoptive, such 
as by having a child and relating to it as a parent or creating 
and maintaining a parental relationship with an adoptive child, 
and providing physical, intellectual and emotional nurture to 
one's natural or adoptive child. 
d 7601  Child-parent relationships  
Creating and maintaining relationships with one's parent, such 
as a young child obeying his or her parents or an adult child 
taking care of his or her elderly parents. 
168 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
d 7602  Sibling relationships  
Creating and maintaining a brotherly or sisterly relationship 
with a person who shares one or both parents by birth, 
adoption or marriage. 
d 7603  Extended family relationships  
Creating and maintaining a family relationship with members 
of one's extended family, such as with cousins, aunts and 
uncles and grandparents. 
d 7608  Family relationships, other specified  
d 7609  Family relationships, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 d 770  
Intimate relationships 
Creating and maintaining close or romantic relationships between 
individuals, such as husband and wife, lovers or sexual partners. 
Inclusions: romantic, spousal and sexual relationships 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 7700  Romantic relationships  
Creating and maintaining a relationship based on emotional 
and physical attraction, potentially leading to long-term 
intimate relationships. 
d 7701  Spousal relationships  
Creating and maintaining an intimate relationship of a legal 
nature with another person, such as in a legal marriage, 
including becoming and being a legally married wife or 
husband or an unmarried spouse. 
d 7702  Sexual relationships  
Creating and maintaining a relationship of a sexual nature, 
with a spouse or other partner. 
d 7708 
Intimate relationships, other specified  
d 7709 
Intimate relationships, unspecified  
 d 779   Particular interpersonal relationships, other specified and unspecified 
 
 d 798  
 
Interpersonal interactions and relationships, other specified 
 d 799  
 
Interpersonal interactions and relationships, unspecified 
 
169 
Activities and Participation 
 
Chapter 8   
Major life areas 
ICF 
This chapter is about carrying out the tasks and actions required to engage in 
education, work and employment and to conduct economic transactions. 
 
Education (d810-d839) 
 
 d 810  
 
Informal education 
Learning at home or in some other non-institutional setting, such as 
learning crafts and other skills from parents or family members, or 
home schooling. 
 d 815   Preschool education 
Learning at an initial level of organized instruction, designed primarily 
to introduce a child to the school-type environment and prepare it for 
compulsory education, such as by acquiring skills in a day-care or 
similar setting as preparation for advancement to school. 
 
 d 820   School education 
Gaining admission to school, Education, engaging in all school-related 
responsibilities and privileges, and learning the course material, 
subjects and other curriculum requirements in a primary or secondary 
education programme, including attending school regularly, working 
cooperatively with other students, taking direction from teachers, 
organizing, studying and completing assigned tasks and projects, and 
advancing to other stages of education. 
 
 d 825   Vocational training 
Engaging in all activities of a vocational programme and learning the 
curriculum material in preparation for employment in a trade, job or 
profession. 
 
 d 830   Higher education 
Engaging in the activities of advanced educational programmes in 
universities, colleges and professional schools and learning all aspects 
of the curriculum required for degrees, diplomas, certificates and other 
accreditations, such as completing a university bachelor's or master's 
course of study, medical school or other professional school. 

 d835 Education life 
Engaging in aspects of life of education institutions, such as university and school related associations, including: clubs, sports, related civic bodies (e.g. school council), and other institutionally-organized initiatives that are not part of the academic curriculum. 
 
 d 839   Education, other specified and unspecified 
 
 
 
170 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
Work and employment (d840-d859) 
 
 d 840   Apprenticeship (work preparation) 
Engaging in programmes related to preparation for employment, such 
as performing the tasks required of an apprenticeship, internship, 
articling and in-service training. 
Exclusion: vocational training (d825) 
 
 d 845   Acquiring, keeping and terminating a job 
Seeking, finding and choosing employment, being hired and accepting 
employment, maintaining and advancing through a job, trade, 
occupation or profession, and leaving a job in an appropriate manner. 
Inclusions: seeking employment;  preparing a resume or curriculum 
vitae; contacting employers and preparing interviews; maintaining a 
job; monitoring one's own work performance; giving notice; and  
terminating a job 
d 8450  Seeking employment  
Locating and choosing a job, in a trade, profession or other 
form of employment, and performing the required tasks to get 
hired, such as showing up at the place of employment or 
participating in a job interview. 
d 8451  Maintaining a job  
Performing job-related tasks to keep an occupation, trade, 
profession or other form of employment, and obtaining 
promotion and other advancements in employment. 
d 8452  Terminating a job  
Leaving or quitting a job in the appropriate manner. 
d 8458  Acquiring, keeping and terminating a job, other specified  
d 8459  Acquiring, keeping and terminating a job, unspecified  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 d 850   Remunerative employment 
Engaging in all aspects of work, as an occupation, trade, profession or 
other form of employment, for payment, as an employee, full or part 
time, or self-employed, such as seeking employment and getting a job, 
doing the required tasks of the job, attending work on time as required, 
supervising other workers or being supervised, and performing 
required tasks alone or in groups. 
Inclusions: self-employment, part-time and full-time employment 
 
 
171 
Activities and Participation 
 
d 8500  Self-employment  
ICF 
Engaging in remunerative work sought or generated by the 
individual, or contracted from others without a formal 
employment relationship, such as migratory agricultural work, 
working as a free-lance writer or consultant, short-term 
contract work, working as an artist or crafts person, owning 
and running a shop or other business. 
Exclusions: part-time and full-time employment (d8501, 
d8502) 
 
 
 
 
 
d 8501  Part-time employment  
Engaging in all aspects of work for payment on a part-time 
basis, as an employee, such as seeking employment and 
getting a job, doing the tasks required of the job, attending 
work on time as required, supervising other workers or being 
supervised, and performing required tasks alone or in groups. 
d 8502  Full-time employment  
Engaging in all aspects of work for payment on a full-time 
basis, as an employee, such as seeking employment and 
getting a job, doing the required tasks of the job, attending 
work on time as required, supervising other workers or being 
supervised, and performing required tasks alone or in groups. 
d 8508  Remunerative employment, other specified  
d 8509  Remunerative employment, unspecified  
 d 855   Non-remunerative employment 
Engaging in all aspects of work in which pay is not provided, full-time 
or part-time, including organized work activities, doing the required 
tasks of the job, attending work on time as required, supervising other 
workers or being supervised, and performing required tasks alone or in 
groups, such as volunteer work, charity work, working for a 
community or religious group without remuneration, working around 
the home without remuneration. 
Exclusion: Chapter 6 Domestic Life 
 
 d 859   Work and employment, other specified and unspecified 
 
Economic life (d860-d879) 
 
 
172 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
 d 860   Basic economic transactions 
Engaging in any form of simple economic transaction, such as using 
money to purchase food or bartering, exchanging goods or services; or 
saving money. 
 
 d 865   Complex economic transactions 
Engaging in any form of complex economic transaction that involves 
the exchange of capital or property, and the creation of profit or 
economic value, such as buying a business, factory, or equipment, 
maintaining a bank account, or trading in commodities. 
 
 d 870   Economic self-sufficiency 
Having command over economic resources, from private or public 
sources, in order to ensure economic security for present and future 
needs. 
Inclusions: personal economic resources and public economic 
entitlements 
 
 
 
 
 
d 8700  Personal economic resources  
Having command over personal or private economic 
resources, in order to ensure economic security for present and 
future needs. 
d 8701  Public economic entitlements  
Having command over public economic resources, in order to 
ensure economic security for present and future needs. 
d 8708  Economic self-sufficiency, other specified  
d 8709  Economic self-sufficiency, unspecified  
 d 879   Economic life, other specified and unspecified 
 
 d 898   Major life areas, other specified 
 
 d 899   Major life areas, unspecified 
 
 
173 
Activities and Participation 
 
Chapter 9   
Community, social and civic life 
ICF 
This chapter is about the actions and tasks required to engage in organized 
social life outside the family, in community, social and civic areas of life. 
 
 d 910   Community life 
Engaging in all aspects of community social life, such as engaging in 
charitable organizations, service clubs or professional social 
organizations. 
Inclusions: informal and formal associations; ceremonies 
Exclusions: non-remunerative employment  (d855); recreation and 
leisure (d920); religion and spirituality (d930); political life and 
citizenship (d950) 
d 9100 
Informal associations  
Engaging in social or community associations organized by 
people with common interests, such as local social clubs or 
ethnic groups. 
d 9101  Formal associations  
Engaging in professional or other exclusive social groups, 
such as associations of lawyers, physicians or academics. 
d 9102  Ceremonies  
Engaging in non-religious rites or social ceremonies, such as 
marriages, funerals or initiation ceremonies. 
d 9108  Community life, other specified  
d 9109  Community life, unspecified  
174 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
 d 920   Recreation and leisure 
Engaging in any form of play, recreational or leisure activity, such as 
informal or organized play and sports, programmes of physical fitness, 
relaxation, amusement or diversion, going to art galleries, museums, 
cinemas or theatres; engaging in crafts or hobbies, reading for 
enjoyment, playing musical instruments; sightseeing, tourism and 
travelling for pleasure. 
Inclusions: play, sports, arts and culture, crafts, hobbies and 
socializing 
Exclusions: riding animals for transportation (d480); remunerative 
and non-remunerative work (d850 and d855); religion and spirituality 
(d930); political life and citizenship (d950) 
d 9200  Play  
Engaging in games with rules or unstructured or unorganized 
games and spontaneous recreation, such as playing chess or 
cards or children's play. 
d 9201  Sports  
Engaging in competitive and informal or formally organized 
games or athletic events, performed alone or in a group, such 
as bowling, gymnastics or soccer. 
d 9202  Arts and culture  
Engaging in, or appreciating, fine arts or cultural events, such 
as going to the theatre, cinema, museum or art gallery, or 
acting in a play, reading for enjoyment or playing a musical 
instrument. 
d 9203  Crafts  
Engaging in handicrafts, such as pottery or knitting. 
d 9204  Hobbies  
Engaging in pastimes such as  collecting stamps, coins or 
antiques. 
d 9205  Socializing  
Engaging in informal or casual gatherings with others, such as 
visiting friends or relatives or meeting informally in public 
places. 
d 9208  Recreation and leisure, other specified  
d 9209  Recreation and leisure, unspecified  
175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities and Participation 
 
 d 930   Religion and spirituality 
ICF 
Engaging in religious or spiritual activities, organizations and practices 
for self-fulfilment, finding meaning, religious or spiritual value and 
establishing connection with a divine power, such as is involved in 
attending a church, temple, mosque or synagogue, praying or chanting 
for a religious purpose, and spiritual contemplation. 
Inclusions: organized religion and spirituality 
 
 
 
 
 
d 9300  Organized religion  
Engaging in organized religious ceremonies, activities and 
events. 
d 9301  Spirituality  
Engaging in spiritual activities or events, outside an organized 
religion. 
d 9308  Religion and spirituality, other specified  
d 9309  Religion and spirituality, unspecified  
 d 940   Human rights 
Enjoying all nationally and internationally recognized rights that are 
accorded to people by virtue of their humanity alone, such as human 
rights as recognized by the United Nations Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights (1948) and the United Nations Standard Rules for the 
Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities (1993); the 
right to self-determination or autonomy; and the right to control over 
one's destiny. 
Exclusion: political life and citizenship (d950) 
 
 d 950   Political life and citizenship 
Engaging in the social, political and governmental life of a citizen, 
having legal status as a citizen and enjoying the rights, protections, 
privileges and duties associated with that role, such as the right to vote 
and run for political office, to form political associations; enjoying the 
rights and freedoms associated with citizenship (e.g. the rights of 
freedom of speech, association, religion, protection against 
unreasonable search and seizure, the right to counsel, to a trial and 
other legal rights and protection against discrimination); having legal 
standing as a citizen. 
Exclusion: human rights (d940) 
 
 d 998   Community, social and civic life, other specified 
 
 
176 
ICF 
Activities and Participation 
 d 999   Community, social and civic life, unspecified 
 
 
177 

d131 Learning through actions with objects
Learning through simple actions on a single object, two or more objects, symbolic and pretend play, such as in hitting an object, banging blocks and playing with dolls or cars. 

d132 Acquiring language
Developing the competence to represent persons, objects, events, feelings through words, symbols, phrases and sentences.

d133 Acquiring additional language 
Developing the competence to represent persons, objects, events, feelings through words, symbols, phrases and sentences, such as in an additional language or signing.

d137 Acquiring concepts
Developing competence to understand and use basic and complex concepts related to characteristics, properties and features defining things, persons or events.

d138 Acquiring information 
Obtaining facts about persons, things and events, such as asking why, what, where and how, asking for names.

