learning and applying knowledge is about learning, applying the knowledge that is learned, thinking, solving problems, and making decisions. 
general tasks and demands is about general aspects of carrying out single or multiple tasks, organizing routines and handling stress. These items can be used in conjunction with more specific tasks or actions to identify the underlying features of the execution of tasks under different circumstances.
communication is about general and specific features of communicating by language, signs and symbols, including receiving and producing messages, carrying on conversations, and using communication devices and techniques. 
mobility is about moving by changing body position or location or by transferring from one place to another, by carrying, moving or manipulating objects, by walking, running or climbing, and by using various forms of transportation. 
self-care is about caring for oneself, washing and drying oneself, caring for one's body and body parts, dressing, eating and drinking, and looking after one's health.
domestic life is about carrying out domestic and everyday actions and tasks. Areas of domestic life include caring for one's belongings and space, acquiring food, clothing and other necessities, household cleaning and repairing, caring for personal and other household objects, and assisting others. 
interpersonal interactions and relationships is about carrying out the actions and tasks required for basic and complex interactions with people (strangers, friends, relatives, family members and lovers) in a contextually and socially appropriate manner. 
major life areas is about carrying out the tasks and actions required to engage in education, work and employment and to conduct economic transactions.
community, social and civic life is about the actions and tasks required to engage in organized social life outside the family, in community, social and civic areas of life.
instances that are irrelevant to the categories described above

